---
title: Surviving Heart Disease in the USA
description: Originally from a country with socialised medicine (UK's NHS), the idea of paying for healthcare out of pocket is still very foreign. Follow me on my journey on being a parent to a child born with a rare heart defect in the USA, and the cost along the way.
starred: true
createdAt: 2020-11-10 12:00:00
updatedAt: 2020-11-10 12:00:00
---

<div class="container">
    <p>Having spent the first 25 years of my life in the United Kingdom, I've probably had more exposure to the National Health Service (NHS) than most British people. I had a bad stutter requiring years of therapy, I had severe childhood asthma, my mom was suddenly hospitalised and died when I was a young teen, I broke bones, was treated for infections/wounds, wore braces for 8 years, had a bimaxillary osteotomy (both jaw bones broken, shortened, and fixed together with 8 pins), had two kidney stone surgeries, many xrays, CTs, MRIs, etc. My dad got treated for &amp; is in remission from cancer, you get the point, and thanks to socialised medicine, it was <mark class="font-weight-bold">all for free</mark><sup>[1]</sup>.</p>
    <p>In 2016, while on a trip to the USA, I met my (now) wife, and we've lived together in the beautiful city of Gary, Indiana ever since. Fast-forward a few years to 2020, during the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic, my wife and I found out we're expecting our first child, and at our 20 week scan, discover our baby has congenital heart disease, a variant of a rare condition called Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome or HLHS for short.</p>
    <p>Sterling, our daughter, was born in early September 2020 at 39 weeks to the soothing sounds of <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bbGRVVQ-17U">Lacksley Castell's Speak Softly</a>. She needed a life-saving procedure minutes after birth to open a restrictive valve in her heart, and had her first major open heart surgery at 7 days old. She will require another two major heart surgeries by the time she's a toddler. At 8 weeks old, Sterling was preemptively diagnosed with isomerism/heterotaxy syndrome, and the odds of her specific heart condition + isomerism, according to her doctor, are <mark class="font-weight-bold">1 in 250,000,000+</mark>. Sterling is a very special little lady, and her mom and I couldn't be more proud of our beautiful little fighter, and as Shakespeare said <mark class="font-weight-bold">though she be but little she is fierce</mark>. All things considered, Sterling is doing extremely well, she will likely spend the first few months of her life in the <abbr title="Pediatric Cardiac Intensive Care Unit">PCICU</abbr> at Christ Medical Center in Chicago, Illinois, under the care of some truly wonderful nurses, doctors, and surgeons.</p>
    <p>The idea of paying for healthcare is still extremely foreign to me. After suddenly losing my mom, my dad's cancer treatment, experiencing so much of the NHS myself, money was never mentioned, I/my family was never at risk of medical debt bankruptcy, affordability was never even a question, just treatment when I/we needed it. Now, I live in a country that charges $40 for skin-skin contact after birth, where the plot of Breaking Bad is centered around creating a meth empire to fund medical expenses related to cancer treatment, where people ration insulin, partake in medical tourism, unnecessarily suffer with treatable ailments because they are either uninsured, underinsured, or simple can't afford the doctor's visit.</p>
    <p>My daughters diagnosis is hard enough as it is, but knowing there's a cost associated to literally every milliliter of medicine, treatment, every day in the PCICU, every scan, every test, every future doctors visit, every ER/A&E visit, every future surgery is just added insult to injury. Knowing her future insurability, or my ability to pay her increased insurance premiums due to her pre-existing conditions, is not a guarantee, is a very scary thought. Knowing bankruptcy, losing my house, is a possibility is a very scary thought.</p>
    <p>&hellip;but I know I am lucky. I know I'll likely make ends meet, thanks to the generosity of family, friends, and strangers donating to our <a href="https://www.gofundme.com/sterling-hlhs-warrior">GoFundMe</a>, something I wish I didn't have to do. I have a happy, healthy marriage, a wonderful wife, a great boss, a great job, with great benefits, a great profession that allows me great freedom, but, even with my daughter's severe diagnosis, I still can't help but feel bad for the single parent, the parents who work minimum wage jobs who can't afford insurance, the parents who lose their jobs & therefore their health insurance, all while having sick children in similar situations to mine.</p>
    <p>It's a broken system where few make it.</p>
    <p>Picture this: you're in the hospital at your child's bedside for weeks, only leaving to stay at the local <a href="https://www.rmhc.org/">Ronald McDonald House</a>, due to COVID-19 restrictions, you're not allowed to enter the city of the hospital if you come from a COVID-19 hotspot without a 14-day self-quarantine, your home being a hotspot. Now imagine, unbeknown to you, you start to get hospital bills in the mail delivered to your home, that you're not allowed to travel to, for amounts of $16, $200, and $250 dollars. Now imagine, you finally realise you have overdue bills, you to go call and pay, only to find out your non-payment has actually landed you up in pre-collections, and you were days/weeks from it being sent to collections. A permanent mark on my credit history for a few hundred dollars, only 8 weeks into a life-long condition.</p>
    <p>Being the data-nerd I am, I want to share my journey along the way, so I decided I'm going to track all bills related to my daughters care, hopefully highlight the actual real-life cost of surviving a chronic disease in the USA, and further prove the system is just terrible. I'll keep this updated as/when I can.</p>
    <surviving-chd></surviving-chd>
    <div class="footnotes">
        <ol>
            <li>Healthcare in Britain is mainly provided by the National Health Service, a public body that provides healthcare to all permanent residents of the United Kingdom that is free at the point of use and paid for from general taxation. <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Healthcare_in_England">[source]</a></li>
        </ol>
    </div>
</div>
